---
layout: post
title:  "Announcing the Open Science Community for EM (OSCEM)"
date:   2024-02-23 12:21:40 +0100
categories: news
---

OpenEM strives to follow [FAIR](https://force11.org/info/the-fair-data-principles//)
principles for all of our data: **F**indable, **A**ccessible, **I**nteroperable, and
**R**eusable. A major part of interoperability between services is describing datasets
using a standardized vocabulary shared between the larger electron microscopy community.
This means representing data with a well-defined *schema* or data model, as well as
agreeing on an *ontology* defining the meaning of each piece of metadata.

While some standards are available for electron microscopy data, no single standard
covers the full data lifecycle from data collection through publication. As such, a
workshop was held at [Paul Scherrer Institute](https://www.psi.ch/en) on the 22-23
February, 2024, with participants from across the EM community. It included
representatives of EM facilities, developers of tools for processing EM data, and
members of the large EM data repositories such as [EMDB](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/emdb/).

As a result of this workshop, the **Open Science Community for Electron Microscopy
(OSCEM)** will draft a standard for representing EM metadata. The standard will include
all metadata required for processing an electron microscopy dataset, with additional
fields to support important use cases such as depositing data in the [Electron
Microscopy Public Image Archive](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/empiar/#), EMDB, and
[PDB](https://www.wwpdb.org/). The standard links existing ontologies where possible,
but extends these to include the full data lifecycle from data collection through
publishing in public repositories.

If you are interested in joining the community, please contact [Jose Maria
Carazo](http://i2pc.es/carazo/) or [Spencer
Bliven](https://www.psi.ch/en/lsm/people/spencer-edward-bliven), or see the [workshop
event page](https://indico.psi.ch/e/em-standards-2024).